Elon Musk unveils some new twists on his plan for Mars

SpaceX considers more ways to use its vast rockets

IN 2016 Elon Musk, the boss of SpaceX, a company which builds rockets and spacecraft, announced his plans for the colonisation of Mars. At the moment SpaceX’s business is launching satellites for private companies and America’s air force, as well as ferrying cargo to the International Space Station. But Mr Musk has said repeatedly that his ultimate aim—and his company’s—is to make humans into a “multi-planetary species”.

On September 29th, at a conference in Adelaide, Mr Musk offered an update on his plans. SpaceX is now doing serious design work, he said, on the successor to its current Falcon family of rockets, a craft called the BFR (for “Big Fucking Rocket”; presumably a temporary name). And the company is putting together plans for using these new rockets for more than Mars colonisation, thus providing a way for it to make the transition from what it does today for profit to what it hopes to do tomorrow for inspiration.

Much of this hinges on making the BFR a little less B. The original was a 12-metre-diameter monster that would have been, far and away, the biggest rocket ever launched. In Adelaide, Mr Musk announced a slimmed-down version that was just 9 metres across. After all, as he pointed out, that was small enough that it could fit inside SpaceX’s existing factories. But smallness is relative: even the slimmed-down BFR would be bigger than the Saturn V that took the Apollo astronauts to the moon, and which remains the biggest rocket ever flown. It would be much larger than anything which currently has any commercial application.

Combined with a new spaceship, which would contain more pressurised cabin space than an Airbus A380, the biggest passenger jet currently flying, Mr Musk reckoned he could deliver perhaps 100 people to the Martian surface per flight. He did not discuss costs. But in the past he has mentioned ticket prices in the region of a few hundred thousand dollars, which, he says, would make a one-way ticket just about affordable to middle-class passengers, assuming they sell all their assets before leaving Earth. How many would choose to avail themselves of the opportunity to settle an airless, irradiated wasteland, even at those low, low prices, remains to be seen—as does the question of whether they could actually create a self-sufficient planetary economy and ecosystem, as Mr Musk hopes.

When it comes to the costs of doing other things with the technology, though, Mr Musk was more forthcoming. As a way of delivering cargo to orbit round the Earth, he says, the BFR could eventually reduce prices 100-fold or more. This is partly an economy of scale and partly new technology, but mostly the further development of reusability. SpaceX is the only company currently able to reuse rockets commercially; its Falcon 9 rockets have evolved from being single-use systems of the sort other launch companies sell into vehicles that can be launched, landed and launched again.

Some might doubt, though, that there is a big enough market to make a much bigger reusable rocket worth the cost of development. A system that could lift a whole new space station into orbit with just three launches might be a bit on the big size for resupplying the one that is already there. It may be that, as enthusiasts have long argued, much cheaper launches will radically increase the number of things people want to do in orbit, and thus demand will boom. But this remains to be seen. Still, Mr Musk is not the only game in town. Blue Origin, a company owned by Jeff Bezos of Amazon, plans to start offering the services of a reusable heavy-lift rocket within a couple of years.

Another option Mr Musk is exploring for making the BFR pay its way is suborbital travel between cities on Earth. A computer-generated video showed passengers in New York boarding one of his giant spaceships, rocketing into space, and then landing in Shanghai 39 minutes later. It should be possible, he says, to fly between any two points on Earth in less than an hour. But this is not a sure thing. Rich people like flying in comfort on a schedule of their own choosing; less rich people like to fly quite cheaply; and governments may prove unwilling to have very large rockets making very rapid descents close to big cities, both as a matter of security and noise pollution. Navigating round those issues may be possible; but it may not be a great deal easier than landing intrepid customers on Mars.